PERGAMON 
Natural Resources Forum 23 (1999) 65-77 
Natural Resources 
FORUM 
Utility of non-timber forest products in a small watershed in the 
Indian Himalayas: the threat of its degradation 
Gopal S. Singh 
Executive Director, Cenrer for Sustainable Environment and Heritage, New Delhi, India. E-mail: dosnad@del2.vsnl.net.in 
Abstract 
This study discusses the use of non-timber forest products (NTFP), especially medicinal plants, by traditional communities 
in the western Himalaya, India. The great socio-cultural rliversiy and ecological complexity of the region is also matched by 
an unirsually large variety offorest species being used. A wide range ofplants, comprising herbs, shrubs and trees are used for 
different domestic purposes, such as food, fodder, materials for construction and handicrafts. Wild plants also play a vital role 
in providing primary health care in the region. In earlier times, forest products were harvested only on a subsistence basis. 
However, in recent decades, factors such as rising market demand, increasing population pressure, and changes in socio- 
ciiltriral and socio-economic values have led to overharvesting. It is now estimated that most of the useful wild herbs in the 
region are overexploited and some of them have become locally extinct. Government forestry policies have, in the past, 
exclusively emphasized plantution and management of trees and have, unfortunately, ignored non-timber products, 0s these 
are  illy of comparatively lesser economic importance. However, it is suggested that proper management of NTFP will help 
upgrade rurd economies. Rccommended policies to this effect include empowerment of local communities and their involve- 
ment in development plans as well as strengthening of indigenous knowledge. To foster sustainable use of NTFP, the following 
steps are also suggested: integmting traditional and scientijic knowledge; safeguarding regeneration potential; cultivating 
wild species, making uppropriate changes to extraction processes used; and establishing more transparency in prices and 
marketing channels. 0 1999 United Nations. Published by Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved. 
Keywords: NrFP: Western Himalaya: Commercialization 
Introduction 
Indigenous people of the western Himalayas, as else- 
where, utilize a wide range of wild forest products for 
their daily needs. Utilization of non-timber forest products 
(NTFP) has supported the rural economy and preserved 
biodiversity for generations. A combination of the socio- 
cultural and ecological characteristics of the region have 
led to the development of a variety of specific typical uses 
of NTFP by the local indigenous people (Gangwar and 
Ramakrishnan, 1990; Rao and Saxena, 1996; Singh et al., 
1996). The use of NTFPs.has evolved since time immemor- 
ial through a system of trial and error. Historically; the 
primary objective of resource use was to secure survival 
rather than economic gain. Indigenous people have tradi- 
tionally maintained a symbiotic relationship with NTFPs, 
using the barter system to exchange medicinal plants and 
other forest products for other essential commodities. 
However, rising population pressure and commercial 
exploitation have, in recent decades, led to over-exploitation 
of certain habitats and species. This study explores the status 
of NTFT, especially as used in traditional primary health 
care, in the Chhakinal watershed in the western Himalayas. 
Terminology 
NTFP is broadly defined here to include fuelwood, 
fodder, biomass, bamboo, grasses, fibre, oil, tannins and 
dyes, gums, resins, medicinal plants, barks, leaves, flowers, 
fruits, tubers, mushrooms, seeds, honey, wild edibles, 
mammals, birds, insects and reptiles, etc. The term clearly 
indicates that these products have not, in the past, been 
thought to be of any economic importance to merit serious 
consideration. Only recently has the economic importance 
of non-timber forest resources been acknowledged, espe- 
cially to local subsistence economies. It has also recently 
been realized that all forest-based resources spring from a 
complex ecosystem of interrelated phenomena, including 
landscape, geography, climate, and edaphic, environmental, 
and ecological factors. The term degradation is used here as 
0165-0203/99/$19.00 8 1999 United Nations. Published by Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved. 
PII: SO1 65-0203(98)00039-7 
66 
G.S. Sirigh / Nnturnl Resources Forum 23 (1999) 65-77 
U 
. -. 
-9. 
.-.-* 
N 
KM 
HIMACHAL PRADESH, 
NORTHERN INDIA 
A 
'9 
I I 
Shamst 
, 
I' 
'\ 
KULLU DISTRICT ,--' 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
District Boundary 
I 
5 -. 
\ 
\ 
I 
\ 
U 
f' 
1.1 Town 
. 
y r . +  
? - - - - + f  
Road 
Fig. I. Location map of Kullu District, Hirnachal Pradesh, northen India. 
the qualitative and quantitative loss of renewable forest 
resources. 
Note on methodology 
Data for this study were collected during three consecu- 
tive years, 1993 to 1996. Medicinal properties of plants 
were learned through interviews with heads of families. 
Men and women were interviewed separately. In order to 
ensure the accuracy of the information, individual 
statements were double checked with other members of 
the community. A number of formal and informal group 
discussions were also conducted during the period of inves- 
tigation. Factors responsible for the degradation of the 
NTFP were analyzed and documented with the help of villa- 
gers and through direct observation. Detailed information 
was collected pertaining to indigenous skills and tools 
pertaining to the use of wild plants in traditional primary 
health care and for other purposes. Archival information on 
NTFP was obtained from the Himachal Pradesh Forest 
G.S. Sinsh /Natural Resources Forum 23 (1999) 65-77 
67 
Table I 
Summary of salient features of the study area 
Attributes 
Gco-climatic features 
Geographical setup 
Geographical area (ha) 
Number of villages 
Numher of households 
Population 
Elevation gradient (m asml) 
Average annual rainfall (mm) 
Monthly mean temperature ("C) 
Annual snowfall (m) 
32"3'-329'N & 77"9'-77"15'E 
4500 
10 
322 
2340 
1500-4500 
I200 
- 1.6-25.4 
3-5 
Land use types (ha) 
Forest area 
1936 
Alpine pastures 
I172 
Open grazing and scrub lands 
722 
Agriculture and settlements 
670 
Cultivable lands 
272 
Terrace land 
213 
Valley land 
59 
Agriculture and animal husbandry 
Number of cultivated crops 
17 
Livestock population 
2184 
Buffalo and cattle 
I076 
Sheep and goats 
I I08 
Department. A field survey of the study area was also under- 
taken. Plant specimens were collected during their flowering 
and fruiting season and identified by appropriately qualified 
experts. A topographical map obtained from the Survey of 
India (scale of 1: 50,000) was used to calculate the acreage 
of areas allotted to different types of land use. 
Study area 
The study area is a small area in the north-western part of 
the Himalayan range. The Himalayas are vast, extending 
from Afghanistan and Central Asia in the west and north 
to western China and northern Burma in the east, forming an 
almost unbroken mountain chain. In India, it extends about 
2500 km in length and 250 km in width covering an area of 
about 590,000 km2; the population of the Himalayan region 
is approximately 51 million people. Its major portion lies 
within India between the rivers Indus and Brahmaputra. The 
Himalayas are characterized by great ecological diversity 
and landscape variability. Although the region corresponds 
to only 18% of the geographical area of India, it is home to 
more than 50% of the country's forest cover and some 40% 
of the species endemic to the Indian subcontinent. 
The study area comprises what is popularly known as the 
Chhakinal watershed. It is located in the north-western part 
of Kullu district in central Himachal Pradesh, India (see Fig. 
1). Salient statistics of the study area are summarized in 
Table 1. Although a small area, the Chhakinal watershed 
displays great variety of socio-economic conditions; levels 
of accessibility; climate; geographic characteristics such as 
altitude and land-use; and village and population size. The 
study area that is popularly known as the Chhakinal 
watershed has altitudes varying between 1500 m up to 
well over 4500 m amsl. The sparse population of some 
2,340 is concentrated between elevations 1500 m and 
2200 m amsl, and dispersed among 10 villages or hamlets, 
all within a radius of 3-5 km of each other. Six hamlets are 
located on south-facing slopes, three on north-facing slopes 
and one at the base of the watershed facing west. All 
villages in the watershed lack access to motorable roads, 
except one village at a lower elevation. During the rainy 
season, roads are frequently blocked as a result of land- 
slides. 
The study area has three main seasons: summer, monsoon 
and winter. The climate is generally cool and dry. Snowfall 
occurs during the period from December to February and 
rain falls mainly during July/August and DecembedJanuary. 
Out of a total annual precipitation of 1200 mm, 41% occurs 
during the rainy season (July-November), 47% in winter 
(December-February), and 12% in the summer months. 
Vegetation 
About 27 km2 of the study area is covered by forest, and 
12 km' is covered by alpine pasture. Trees in the study area 
include semi-evergreen, evergreen and deciduous species, 
varying from subtropical types at lower elevations to tempe- 
rate and alpine types at higher elevations. Based on the 
dominance of. extant species, namely Pinus wallichiana, 
Cedriu deorkira, Ahies pindrow, Aesculiis indica, Qiiercus 
semecarpifolia, Betiila utilis, broadly seven vegetation and 
landscape types were recorded, including closed canopy 
forests, scrub, open grazing land, alpine meadows, waste 
lands and agricultural fields. The forest can be generally 
divided into three zones. Coniferous species occur at 
lower elevations ( I  600 m-2300 m) while broad leaf bearing 
trees are usually found at higher elevations (2300 m- 
3200 m), although some species are common at both eleva- 
tions. Coverage in the alpine zone is sparse, consisting of a 
fcw species of small shrubs and low trees. The alpine 
pastures are ecologically conditioned to host a large variety 
of traditional medicinal herbs, which dominate the area. 
Abundance and use of medicinal plants 
In Himachal Pradesh alone, around 3300 herb species 
have been recorded. Of these, 150 species are generally 
credited with medicinal properties, out of which about 100 
are of confirmed medical value. About 40 plant derived 
medicines are regularly produced in the state (Anonymous, 
1993). 
Out of the total number of plant species constituting the 
NTFP resource base in the study area, 55% are used for 
medicinal purposes, while 16% are used as fodder, fuel- 
wood and leaf litter; the litter is used for animal bedding 
and organic manure preparation. Of the 134 plant species in 
68 
G.S. Sing11 /Natural Resources Forwn 23 (1999) 65-77 
the Chhakinal watershed that are being used for various 
purposes, 115 are wild and 19 are cultivated (mainly food 
items). A total of 73 plant species are being used for their 
medicinal properties (Singh, 1998b). All these plants grow 
sparsely in agricultural fields, forest areas and alpine 
pastures. Ten species commonly found close to settlements 
and farm fields are used as fuel and fodder. Prominent 
species include Quercus dilatata, Q. incana, species of 
Pyrus and Prunus, and Ulmus wallichiana. Coniferous 
species such as Abies pindrow, Cedrus deodara, Picea 
morinda, Pinus wallichiana and Taws baccata are concen- 
trated just above the settlements and are also widely used as 
animal bedding and fuel. The litter of these species mixed 
with livestock dung is used as organic manure for indigen- 
ous farming. Fibrous plants such as Cannabis sativa, 
Girardiana heterophylla and Urtica parvijlora are used to 
make domestic items such as ropes, mats and traditional 
footwear. Traditionally, the leaves of Rhododendron antho- 
pogon, Saussurea lappa and TUUS baccata were used to 
make tea but such usage has declined progressively because 
of the introduction of commercial tea. The powder extracted 
from the rhizomes of Dioscorea deltoidea and Salvia moor- 
croftiana is used by indigenous people as a laundry deter- 
gent. Seven species of plants are used as incense in religious 
ceremonies. Of these, Jiiniperous communis and Jurinea 
macrocephala are marketed on a large scale. 
. 
Traditional village management of NTFP 
The villages located nearest to forest resources are 
usually more intimately linked with forest-based products. 
Traditional utilization of NTFP subsidizes the local econ- 
omy and decreases local people's dependence on market- 
based commodities. The collection of NTFP, particularly 
medicinal plants, is undertaken by the local people under 
the bartandhari or right-holder system. This system permits 
villagers to collect plants required for their daily needs, for 
sale, or to exchange for other essential commodities. Within 
a village, NTFPs are not sold or purchased within families 
of the same social group. Village tradition favours the 
production and marketing of NTFP by members of sched- 
uled castes' having smaller and more marginal lands 
compared to more important landowners of higher caste 
groups'. Bamboo articles, such as baskets and fibre products 
for personal use may be handicrafted by people of all 
classes, but marketing and selling is undertaken only by 
people from lower castes, who often also supply distant 
villages and urban markets. 
' 
A number of village level institutions called village 
' Scheduled castes are granted special rights and privileges for their 
sustenance. Scheduled castes m mainly untouchables (harijans), who 
constitute an important component of the scheduled castes, as do also the 
tribals. Untouchables also include those who perform lowly menial tasks, 
e.g. cobblers and undertakers. 
* Average land holding per family in the study area is 0.84 ha (Singh et 
al.. 1997b). 
committees, or panchayats, have been effectively operating 
in the area during recent years for the better management of 
NTFP (Singh ef al., 1996). Socially harmonious use and 
management of NTFPs were not thc only objectives of tradi- 
tional institutions. They also serve to maintain the ecologi- 
cal diversity of the area. Indeed, the collective culture of 
communi ty survival has helped to protect forest resources 
from overexploitation. Also, worship of local nature deities 
has led to the creation of sacred groves, which has protected 
biodiversity in the area. Sustainability has also been furth- 
ered by the geographic characteristics of the region, such as 
inaccessibility, rough terrain, environmental uncertainty 
and precariousness of agriculture. These are reinforced by 
local institutions, social control mechanisms, customs and 
mores concerning access and property rights to extraction, 
which have served as unintended but sophisticated conser- 
vation strategies. 
Simple systems for obtaining maximum harvests are 
being practiced in the villages. Branches and leaves of 
tree species such as Qiierciis dilatata, Q. incana and 
Ulmiis wullichiana are lopped in alternate years. Grasses 
are fully harvested from traditionally divided area. Once 
drying is completed, NTFP or fodder products are stored 
in houses or other shaded places. Leaf litter of Pims tvall- 
ichiana, Abies pindrow, Cerlrus deorlara and Picea morinda 
is collected from traditionally divided forest areas. There is. 
however, a strong need to introduce alternate systems of 
grazing in the area. Allowing cattle to graze freely should 
be generally avoided in order to achieve maximum fodder 
production from the open uncultivable land and abandoned 
fields. 
Gathering 
The tradition of communal excursions to gather NTFF' is 
considered to be a mechanism for minimizing the chances of 
unequal sharing, overexploitation, and also for providing 
security from wildlife, uncertain weather conditions and 
loneliness. Sometimes people take their livestock with 
them on collecting excursions. Shepherds may engage in 
collecting NTFPs while rearing and grazing their livestock 
in the alpine region. Traditionally, the collection of NTFPs 
was assigned to women and children, who engaged in this 
activity during their free time, and gathered forest produce 
with the sole objective of meeting their day-to-day needs. 
Women and children usually collect herbs that are found 
close to settlements and low-lying forest, like Dioscorea 
deltoidea and Morchella esculenta; also during their spare 
time while grazing cattle during the months from April 
through June and while collecting other useful NTFP, 
such as fodder and fuelwood. However, medicinal herbs 
are collected in all seasons, and by people from all cate- 
gories and economic groups. 
Species found at higher altitudes and alpine regions are 
usually collected by men. Parties are organized of 5-15 
men, carrying food and supplies on their heads or on horses. 
G.S. Singh / Nnrural Resources Forum 23 (1999) 65-77 
69 
Table 2 
Forest resources (NTFP) used in the study area 
Use category 
No. of plant specics 
Medicinal plants 
Stomach problems 
Boils, cuts and wounds 
Pain killers 
Gum and tooth diseases 
Colds and cough 
Eye disorders 
Fever 
Diuretics 
Child birth 
Cancer treatment 
Plants used for food 
Spices and condiments 
Mushrooms, roots and 
vegetables 
Fruits 
Household uses 
Dye materials 
Fibre yielding plants 
Bamboo species 
Incense 
Tea 
Sollp 
Poisons 
Fuelwood 
Animal fodder 
Animal bedding 
32 
13 
10 
5 
6 
6 
5 
5 
2 
I 
10 
12 
25 
4 
3 
I 
7 
3 
2 
2 
21 
I4 
7 
The group will live together in tents or temporarily 
constructed sheds for a period of 15-20days. However, 
high market value species such as Picrorrhiza kiirrooa, 
Jurinen macrocepliala and Rheum australe, exclusively 
confined to high altitudes, are also collected by women. 
Increasing commercialization has undoubtedly accelerated 
the involvement of women and children in the collection of 
highly marketable species of medicinal plants. 
Preparation of medicinal plants 
Medicinal plants have been collected in the study area for 
generations. Traditional medicine is inexpensive and locally 
available. It also enjoys wider social acceptance than 
western medicine and sometimes meets psychological 
needs better. Local knowledge about the NTFPs in these 
traditional villages has existed at the level of essential 
needs of a subsistence economy. 
Medicinal plants grow in a range of habitats. The majority 
of medicinal herbs of the region have very short life spans; if 
not tapped at the appropriate point in time, herbs will die 
and decay naturally, and thus be wasted. All parts of plants 
are collected: leaves, shoots, rhizomes, roots, flowers, seeds, 
inflorescences and whole plants. Leaves, stems, flowers, 
fruits, seeds, barks, roots and rhizomes are used for different 
ailments mostly prepared as powder, paste, juice, decoction 
or infusion. Sometimes fresh or dried plant parts are taken 
orally. Out of 73 plants of traditional medicinal value, about 
32 plants are used to cure digestive problems. Thirteen 
plants are used to cure boils, ten plants are used as analge- 
sics, five for dental and gum-related problems, five for fever 
and diuretic problems, and one for curing cancer (Table 2). 
Some plants like Acorus calamus, Ainsliaea optera, 
Berberis aristata, Jurinea macrocephala, Oxalis cornicu- 
lata, Plantago major, Rheum emodi, Thalictrum javanicum 
and Viola odorata are used to treat a variety of ailments. If a 
patient does not recover from an ailment during a specific 
period of time, a different remedy is tried. 
Skills 
Local village people engaged in collecting herbs may not 
be technically skilled in extraction, but they are extremely 
skillful in the identification, collection, processing, grading, 
trading and use of NTFP. Older generations of people were 
even more skilled than the younger generations. 
Tools and techniques 
The method of collection involves the uprooting of useful 
plants using a locally designed sharp-edged trowel although 
people can also often be seen uprooting plants by hand. 
There is a strong need for the introduction of appropriately 
designed technology and tools for extraction, although 
people have over the generations developed a variety of 
extraction practices through trial and error. For example, 
in the case of Acorus calamus. Dioscorea deltoidea, 
Rheum awtrale, Selinum tenuifoliurn, Valeriana jatamansii, 
Jurinea macrocephala, Podophyllum hexandrum and 
Nardostachys grandijlora, fine roots, leaf scars and soil 
particles are removed from main roots and rhizomes. 
Then, rhizomes are sliced into small pieces and dried in 
the sun or in open air for about a week. If the weather is 
not clear, the plant is dried with the help of smoke in 
thatches either in the forests or at home. Not all plants are 
dried in direct sunlight. For instance, drying the roots of 
Aconitiirn heterophylliim in direct sunlight would lead to 
the evaporation of its active ingredients. The root bark of 
Jiiglans regia is peeled off and immediately folded in small 
pieces of about 10 cm in length and dried in the sun. Flowers 
of Viola odorata are collected while in the case of Morch- 
ella esculenta, whole fruiting bodies are uprooted. Chains of 
Morchella esculenta are prepared with the help of needle 
and thread and hung above the kitchen roof just above 
the locally designed oven for a period of 10-15days. 
This method protects the plant’s active ingredients from 
deterioration. 
Drug preparation techniques are very simple. Powders 
and pastes are prepared with the help of traditionally 
designed flat stones and pestles. Small pieces of cloth are 
used to extract juices. Fibre extraction processes are also 
archaic. Dried plants, are tied in small bundles, and 
70 
G.S. Singh /Narural Resources Forum 23 (1999) 65-77 
submerged in water till the bark decomposes in about 30- 
40 days. Once the bark has decomposed, the bundle is taken 
out, beaten on stone and cleaned with water. The woody 
portion is removed manually after drying leaving a dull 
coloured fibre. It is desirable to make available a more effi- 
cient process to the indigenous people to accelerate the 
decomposition process, reduce time and water consumption, 
and produce optimal quality fibre. The fibre is used for the 
preparation of handicrafts and also as fuel. 
Forest policy - 
a long journey 
The history of forest management in Himachal Pradesh 
can be divided into three phases: the era of princely states, 
the British era, and the post-Independence era. 
Era of princely states 
The modem state of Himachal Pradesh was formed after 
Independence by the integration of some 30 princely states. 
Not much is known about forest conservation policy prior to 
the initiation of regular forest management by the British. It 
is possible that forests were not demarcated for preservation 
because of theic abundance. 
Colonial era 
In 1850, the British colonial rulers that replaced the prin- 
cely states identified the need for forest conservation in the 
area. New legislation in 1859 forbade the felling of trees 
without the prior permission of the Deputy Commissioner. 
However, for commercially inferior trees, the permission of 
the village headman was deemed sufficient. Ancient rights, 
such as grazing of cattle and the collection of dry wood and 
leaves, were allowed to continue, although one third of each 
forest area was required to be closed entirely for three years 
on a rotating basis. In 1864, the Forest Department was 
established and the following year the first Indian Forest 
Act (1865) was passed. However, these developments at 
the political level did not affect existing rights of individuals 
and communities. Permanent demarcation of forests in the 
area that is now Himachal Pradesh commenced in the year 
1884 and has continued to be one of the pressing needs 
facing the area. Even today, most forest areas are not prop- 
erly demarcated, resulting in illegal felling, encroachment, 
quarrying, mining, and a host of additional problems threa- 
tening the sustainable use of forest resources. 
In 1894, the first Forest Policy was enunciated and later 
became the basis of forest management and working plans 
in India. In 1902, proper silvicultural systems for selective 
felling were introduced in the working plans; working plans 
prepared in previous years had prescribed clear cutting of 
forests. By the year 1935, most of the forests that had been 
declared as reserved, were brought under working plans. 
Post-Independence era 
> 
A new National Forest Policy was enunciated in 1952, 
building on and enlarging the first forest policy of 1894. It 
prescribed the maintenance of forest cover over 66% of the 
total area of the hilly states. This policy has helped in formu- 
lating management plans for the state forests. Subsequently, 
in 1980, a State Forest Policy for Himachal Pradesh was 
enunciated under the ambit of the National Forest Policy 
to meet the specific requirements of the state. The National 
Forest policy was revised in 1988 to emphasize environ- 
mental stability and maintenance of ecological balance, 
among other related objectives. 
National parks 
In 1972, a unified National Act came into being under 
which areas could be constituted and managed as national 
parks, sanctuaries, game reserves and closed areas. This 
resulted in the establishment of 30 wildlife sanctuaries, 
two national parks and three game reserves in Himachal 
Pradesh, covering an area of about 5940 km’. to preserve 
its unique natural heritage. This encompasses more than 8% 
of the total area of the state (Anonymous, 1993). There has 
been a complete ban on hunting in the state since 1983, and 
all tree felling has been stopped in national parks and 
sanctuaries. 
Sustainable innnagenlent of NTFP 
Despite the existence of much legislation based on 
management and endowment, not a single policy was imple- 
mented for the better management of NTFP. Most legisla- 
tion emphasizes revenue generation rather than resource’ 
management. Integrated policy should be framed assigning 
management responsibilities to local institutions, and 
community based resource management systems. A variety 
of property rights and land tenure arrangements that rein- 
force the positive effects of sustainable and fiscal policies 
should be formulated. These measures could safeguard 
traditional NTFT, resource management policies and prac- 
tices, and could focus the attention of the local community 
on the value of indigenous knowledge and experience. 
Legal status of forest lands 
In principle, all lands and forests in the study area 
belonged to the ruler, but the rights of the people to use 
the NTFP for domestic or agricultural purposes were 
never denied. However, after the annexation of the area 
by the British, there was a reorganization in management 
of the forest areas. The British recognized the traditional 
right of the local people to collect and use NTFP from the 
forested areas. Forest land was brought under state owner- 
ship through the Government Forest Act of 1865 which was 
later replaced by the Indian Forest Act of 1878. These Acts 
G.S. 
Singh / Natural Resources Forum 23 (1999) 65-77 
71 
Table 3 
Royalty Fee (Rs per 100 Kg) charged by the village panchayor and Forest Department 
Botanical name 
Local name 
Village Panchayar since 1964 
Forest Department since 1993 
Abies webbiana 
Aconituin chesmanthus 
Aconitrirn heterophyllrim 
Aconirum violaceurn 
Aconis calanrus 
Adianruni lanakatrim 
Ainslineu aptera 
Angelica g h c a  
Artemisia bruvifolia 
Alropn accuminata 
Banium paralcum 
Berberis lycium, B. aristarn 
B. nssiarics, B. vulgaris 
Dioscorea deltoidea 
Ephedra spp. 
Girnrdiana heterophylla 
Hedychium acuminatuni 
Heracleum spp. 
Hyoscyamus niger 
furinin mcicrocephola 
Lichens 
Morchelln esculenta 
Nardosrochys jatamnnsi 
Orchis kiti/olia 
Picrorrhix kurreoci 
Pinus wcillichiuna 
Pismcici integerriinu 
Podophyllum herundrum 
Poly,~on~rtirni 
verticillurum 
Potentiller nepulensis 
Rheum onodi 
Rhocldendron cciinponulatum 
Salvitr nroorcrr~jtiaria 
Suussirrm lappci 
Selinirrin vnginotum 
Swevticr chirntci 
T n r w  buccorci 
Theilictrrrm spp. 
Thymus serphyllum 
Tinosporn cordifolia 
Valeriano hardwickii 
Valeriunn wallichii 
Violet odora 
Ialis patra 
Patish. atish 
Patis (mithi) 
Mitha tejla 
Buch 
Dusgtuli 
Sathjalori 
Chora 
Seski 
Jharka 
Kalazira 
Pasaunt. kashambal 
Singli-mingli 
Dutohur. ephederina 
Bichhu buti 
Kapper kachri 
Patishan 
Kharasani. ajwain 
Dhoop 
Chdora 
Guchhi 
Jatamanshi. balchora 
Salam punja 
Karoo 
Kail 
Kakarsinghi 
Bankakri 
Salam rnishri 
Dori 
Rewandchini 
Kashmiri patta 
Thuth 
Kuth 
Dutknsh 
Chiryata 
Dirmi. rakhal 
Mamiri 
Banjawain 
Gloe 
Nihnni 
Mushakbala 
Banfshn 
are the basis of the current legal classification that iden- 
tifies four classes within forests. These are as follows: 1. 
Reserve forest (RF) - area of minimal use and rights for 
the local people for which there is a revenue record; 2. 
First Class Protected Forest (FCPF) - with more local use 
rights, but limited to less commercially valuable parts of 
the forest; 3. Second Class Protected Forest (SCPF); and 
4. Waste Forest. In general, land use rights in FCPF areas 
are more specific while those of SCPF support more 
general village rights. The rules regarding the use of 
SCPF areas are not clear. There is a disagreement regard- 
ing their use right status even among various government 
departments. Village land-holder rights were defined by 
Anderson (1886) and form the basis of current user rights 
I 
85 
7500 
1500 
500 
130 
80 
50 
125 
50 
60 
2000 
500 
900 
50 
I50 
70 
25 
150 
500 
225 
I0,OOO 
690 
6000 
540 
I000 
1000 
450 
1000 
40 
110 
I50 
180 
300 
400 
70r) 
600 
335 
100 
100 
300 
590 
2250 
in protected forest lands. These include grazing rights, 
timber for house construction, fodder for bedding collec- 
tion, wood for fuel and tool-making, and NTFPs such as 
medicinal herbs. 
Information on the legal aspects of NTFP uses is based 
primarily on people’s perceptions and what is locally under- 
stood as a right to herb collection. All the herb collectors 
encountered during the course of the study identified them- 
selves as right-holders. There is an urgent need to develop 
and design strategies for revising the land-holder rights, in 
order to resolve the conflicts and confusion among villagers 
with the objectives of protecting resources for local people, 
upgrading village economy, and implementing a sound 
ecological resource management system. 
72 
G.S. 
Singli / Nntiirnl Resources Fonrm 23 (1999) 65-77 
Table 4 
Evidence of the overexploitation of NTFP or medicinal plants in the study 
area 
Attributes 
% Response 
I .  Increase in time and labour needed to collect medicinal 
2. Greater distances to travel to gather medicinal plants 
3. Problems in finding certain medicinal plants 
4. Larger numbers of pcrsons per family needed to collect 
medicinal plants 
5. Medicinal plants extracted before they are mature 
7. Poor regeneration results, low availability 
8. Reduction in yield (root material) of certain medicinal 
plants 
9. Climate change responsible for reduced availability of 
medicinal plants 
10. Over-exploitation linked to increased population 
pressure 
I I .  Market demand linked to over-exploitation of certain 
kinds of medicinal plants 
12. Unscientific methods of collection used 
13. Reduced area available for litter collection caused by 
loss of forest cover 
14. Reduced amounts of fodder available as fodder-trees 
lost due to agriculture expansion 
15. More time and Iiibour needed to collect fuelwood. 
Fodder and litter caused by loss of nearby forest cover 
96 
78 
70 
86 
82 
94 
68 
72 
56 
90 
98 
42 
76 
94 
70 
plants 
6. Disappearance of certain species near settlements 
The role of village panchayaf-needs to be strengthened 
The Forest Department itself has a minor involvement in 
the collection of medicinal plants and other NTFP 
resources. Prior to 1993, this department did not charge 
any royalty fee for the collection of medicinal plants, 
although a 1964 notification empowered the village 
panchayat to charge one when the collectors were agents 
or contractors and not villagers native to the area. The 
income generated from this scheme was to be used for 
village development. In 1978, the Forest Department issued 
export permits to those who sent the medicinal plant mate- 
rial elsewhere. Except for Morchella esculenta, locally 
known as gucchi and cones, a nominal fee of Rs 5 was 
charged per export permit irrespective of the quantity and 
type 06 the material being exported. In addition to the ordin- 
ary fee, a sum of Rs 150 was charged as forest revenue for 
the collection of 100 kg of gucchi and Rs 25 for the collec- 
tion of 100 kg of cones. 
In 1993, the Government of Himachal Pradesh issued a 
notification suggesting that export fees of forest produce be 
raised (Table 3). This was the first time that the Government 
had initiated the collection of royalty for a variety of impor- 
tant NTFPs. Before 1993, there were 14 plants for which 
export permits were issued. After 1993, the number 
increased to 42 plants of these 32 are found in the study 
area. This royalty will certainly increase the amount of 
revenue to the Forest Department substantially, but will 
have little relevance to the principles of sustainable resource 
exploitation or management of economic interests of the 
indigenous people directly involved in the collection of 
NTFP. 
Increased market demand and substantial price incre- 
ments for NTFP have inevitably increased extraction. 
Panchuycit level policy needs to be strengthened to bridge 
the gap between sustainable utilization for basic needs and 
over extraction to fulfill market demand. Ideally, village 
level operating committees under the guidance of the village 
panchayat should police and control the exploitation of 
NTFP. 
Marketing patterns - 
a challenge to evolve new options 
Commercial markets for NTFPs or medicinal herbs 
opened at different points in time for different species. At 
the village level, there are no commercial outlets that sell 
medicines derived from local herbs. While the exchange of 
medicinal plants for domestic use is common among people 
in the area, the major commercial activity is related to the 
export of the produce outside the village boundaries. Prices 
at which herbs are sold to agents are almost never standar- 
dized; a high variability in prices may occur within very 
short distances. Village level agents sell the produce to 
wholesalers who operate in nearby towns and district head- 
quarters. The produce is exported from these areas to other 
metropolitan cities after payment of export fees to the Forest 
Department. Species like Jqltins regici, Morchella escii- 
lenta and Picrorrhiza kurrooci are marketed every year 
while Dioscoreei clelroitlea, Jiirinea macrocephnln, Poclo- 
phylliim emoeli, Valeriaria jatiimansii, Aconitum hrterophyl- 
lum, Rheum austale, Angelica glauca and Berberis tiristara 
are collected depending upon market demand. Commercial 
extraction of most plants began rcughly 10 to 15 years ago. 
Because most local people lack knowledge of market chan- 
nels, most of these valuable drugs are sold at very low prices 
to local contractors and traders who take the lion's share of 
the profits. An example is one kilogram of dried Morchella 
esculenta which costs Rs 1500-2000 in the village, while in 
the nearby towns in the same district a kilogram of the same 
costs Rs 3000-4000. Therefore, while villagers do most of 
the work, they retain the lesser share of the earnings; the 
opposite condition applies to agents and middlemen. As a 
result of these inequalities, it has become necessary to 
devise new strategies for strengthening the village level 
economy and marketing channels. A cooperative system 
that would make the role of the middleman redundant and 
retain substantial amounts of money in the villages, would 
be ideal. Government initiatives to this effect would go a 
long way to improve marketing facilities at the village level. 
Commercial exploitation - 
evidence of overexploitation 
No studies have yet been conducted to assess the impact 
of herb collection on the habitat. Limited studies of Joshi 
G.S. Singh / Naturol Resources Forum 23 (1999) 65-77 
73 
and Edington (1990) in Nepal, Cunningham (1991) in South 
Africa and Farooquee and Saxena (1996) in India, indicate 
that increased marketing and commercialization, especially 
in response to demand from urban areas, are likely to lead to 
overexploitation of certain species. Gaston and Carson 
(1992) pointed out in their study in the Great Himalayan 
National Park in Kullu district of Himachal Pradesh that 
most of the medicinal herbs have been overexploited, as is 
obvious from the fact that they are becoming harder and 
harder to find. Some of the species collected earlier are no 
longer found and might even have become locally extinct. 
In the villages, medical practitioners harvest plant materials 
from local environments in ways that ensure sustainable 
supply. With the trends towards extensive and widespread 
use of NTFPs and medicinal plants, and the recent develop- 
ment of infrastructure and trade to urban markets, the ques- 
tion must be asked whether this leads to overexploitation. 
There appears to be mixed evidence as to whether medicinal 
plants are becoming scarce in the study area. A majority of 
herb collectors interviewed in the area believe that medic- 
inal plant resources in the area are dwindling. Many tradi- 
tional practitioners continue to believe that medicinal plants 
are God-given products of nature and will therefore have 
eternal supplies. However, some are less optimistic and feel 
that forest reserves have to be protected more stringently to 
ensure a supply of wild medicines for posterity. 
Evidence related to the progressive decline in quantity 
and quality of NTFP and related medicinal plants was 
recorded from several villages in the study area (Table 4). 
One of the plausible explanations offered for the decline in 
availability and quality of herbs is early or premature extrac- 
tion of plants immediately after the seedling stage. Natural 
regeneration is also hampered because of early extraction as 
plants are unable to mature to the flower and seed formation 
stage. Reckless extraction combined with lack of biological 
knowledge exacerbates the situation. Collectors have also 
mentioned that the size of underground plant materials like 
rhizomes and roots is declining because of frequent digging. 
As an example, it was described that the roots of four to five 
year-old Jiirirzra macrocephaln were as thick as human 
forearms six to eight years ago. Today, the same roots are 
much more difficult to find and are apparently no thicker 
than thumbs! Rhizomes of plants like Saussiirea fnppa, 
Picrorrhiza kurrooa, Jiirinea macrocephala and Aconitiim 
heterophylliim are known to yield plentiful harvests when 
collected every two to three years. Increasing market 
demand has resulted in annual collection and compromised 
both yield size and quality. Frequent harvesting has been 
identified as a problem with several other species in the area. 
The rapid depletion of NTFP appears to be a direct result 
of growing demand and overexploitation in several other 
species. TU.YL~S 
baccata is a good example. This species 
has naturally poor regenerating ability. Traditionally, this 
species was used as a constituent of tea. In recent years, it 
was discovered that the species yielded an alkaloid that 
could be used in the treatment of cancer. Thc state 
government granted permission for commercial extraction 
in 1996. A majority of the people interviewed responded 
that local and less distant areas have almost lost the species 
as a result of reckless and rampant collection. 
Local people have reported that commercialization has 
changed the collection strategy. Previously, individual 
families harvested plants for domestic use. Now two to 
four households group together to facilitate maximum 
collection. Further, the period of collection has increased 
to six or seven months (April to October) from the previous 
norm of three to four months (May to August). Some people 
feel that changes in climatic patterns such as low snowfall, 
irregular rainfall and increasing temperatures may be 
partially responsible for poor regeneration and scarcity of 
NTFPs. Previously, the collection of herbs in the alpine 
meadows was done together with livestock grazing. Nowa- 
days, more effort is expended collecting herbs in the alpine 
areas than grazing because it is perceived to be more 
economically beneficial. Consequently, people now have 
to travel further, and are able to collect smaller quantities 
of herbs of a poorer quality compared to earlier times. The 
social consequences of overexploitation inevitably have an 
impact on the poor and the marginalized people of the 
community. 
Locally bred food crops and agroforestry tree species that 
were of great value for fodder and fuelwood are being 
rapidly replaced by the incessantly growing agribusiness 
(Singh et of., 1997a.b). Forest areas that have been taken 
over for agricultural use also pose a threat to the NTFP. 
Growing market demand for charcoal, especially during 
severe winters, is threatening to render species used for 
fodder and fuelwood locally extinct, e.g. Quercus. 
The factors most responsible for overexploitation can be 
summed up as follows: slow growing species; poor regen- 
eration and replicability; increasing agribusiness; conflicts 
over property rights; growing urban demands; increasing 
population pressure; geoclimatic factors; prevailing ecolo- 
gical and environmental conditions; fragile landscape; lack 
of scientific knowledge; poor policy for NTFP management; 
and the socio-economic circumstances of people. 
Commercialization - 
unsustainable to hill people 
Like other parts of the Himalayan region, the primary 
occupations of people in this area are animal husbandry, 
production of woolen garments and collection and trade of 
medicinal herbs and other NTFPs. Increased awareness of 
herbal medicine in the recent past combined with the growth 
of infrastructure tremendously increased the market value of 
medicinal plants in the area. 
Commercialization of NTFPs has led to reckless and 
unsustainable extraction patterns. Earlier, extraction was 
done by skilled people who were well informed about the 
biology of the plant species they were extracting. Rising 
74 
Table 5 
Ethnobotany of some of the commercially exploited medicinal herbs in the study area 
G.S. Singh / Natural Resources Forum 23 (1999) 65-77 
Description (Botanical name. 
Usage 
local name, family name) 
Productive life 
of plant (years) 
Achillea millefolium (L.) 
Chuna 
Fam. Compositae 
Aconirum hererophyllum (Wall) 
Panish. atees, mithipatish 
Fam. Ranunculaceae 
Acorus calamus (L.) 
Banj, buch, bach 
Fam. Araceae 
Ainsliaea aptera (DC.) 
Suthjalari. sathjalori, karvi booti 
Fam. Compositae 
Angelica glauca (Edgew.) 
Chorah. budhchorah 
Fam. Umbelliferae 
Atropa accuminata (Royle) 
Jharka 
Fam. Solanaceae 
Berberis nristata (DC.) 
Kashamal, Kashambal 
Fam. Berberidaceae 
Dactylorhiiu hotngirea (D.Don) 
Hathpanja. hathjari, panja 
Fam. Orchidaceae 
Dioscorea deltoida (Wall) 
Singli. singli-mingli 
Fam. Dioscoreaceae 
Heracletim canescens (Lindl.) 
Patishan 
Fam. Umbelliferae 
Junglans regia (L.) 
Akhrot 
Fam. Juglandaceae 
Jiirinen macrocephalu (Royle) 
Dhoop. guggal 
Fam. Compositae 
Morchella esculenta (L.) 
Guchchhi 
Fam. Dioscomycetes 
Nardostachys grandiflora (DC) 
(N. Jatamansi DC) 
Balchora. jatamansi 
Fam. Valerianaceae 
Physochlaina praealta (Dence) 
Bajarbhang, jangali bhang 
Fam. Solanaceae 
Picrorrhiza kurrooa (Royle ex 
Benth.) 
Karoo, Kodu 
Fam. Scrophulariaceae 
Juice from crushed leaves used for gastric problems and toothache 
5 
Root powder used to cure gastric diseases 
10-12 
Powder made from rhizomes used to heal cuts and wounds and for dysentery and fever 
5 
Powder from roots used to heal cuts and wounds and for stomach ailments and as a diuretic 
5-6 
Powder from roots used for colds and stomach disorders 
7-8 
Powder from roots and leaves used as sedative and diuretic 
Root used for rheumatic. jaundice, diarrhea and skin diseases 
Paste made from tubers applied on cuts and wounds 
Powder from rhizomes used as soap 
Powder made from roots used for stomach ailments 
Twigs and bark used for gum and tooth diseases 
Powder from roots used to cure recurrent fever 
The fruiting body boiled with milk is used as a remedy for colds and cough 
Root used for stomach ailments 
8-10 
6-7 
10 
10 
a 
20-25 
10-15 
10-12 
3-5 
Powder from seeds used as narcotic and for urine disorders 
Powder from roots used for jaundice and stomach disorders 
5-8 
20-25 
G.S. Singh / Natural Resources Forum 23 (1999) 6-5-77 
75 
Table 5 (continued) 
Description (Botanical name, 
Usage 
local name, family name) 
Productive life 
of plant (years) 
Porloph.vlluin hexandrum 
Podophylliim emacii (Wall) 
Bankakroo, bankakra 
Farn. Berberidaceae 
Polygontiin ainplexicaule (Don) 
Doriga 
Farn. Polygonaceae 
Rheum australe (Don) 
Chuchchi. rewandchini 
Fam. Polygonaceae 
Saussurea lappa (Clarke) 
Kunth, kuth 
Farn. Compositae 
(Roylc) 
Selinum tenuijolium (Wall.) 
Mutoshal, benug 
Fam. Umbellifeerne 
Valerioiia jntamansii (Jones) 
Mushkbnla 
Fam. Valerianacea 
Root powder used for stomach ailments 
10 
Paste made from leaves used for boils and skin diseases 
Roots and rhizomes used for gastric disorders, boils, headaches and muscular pain 
Root used to cure colds and cough 
Powder from roots mixed with mustard oil applied to swollen and painful joints 
Root powder used for gastric disorders 
6-1 
5 
20-25 
3-5 
5-6 
market demands have favoured the overextraction of some 
species threatening to render them locally extinct. 
The direct local use of plant resources contributes to the 
preservation of species and habitats and can be used as the 
basis for conservation policies geared toward indigenous 
management regimes and utilization. However, commercial 
extraction has threatened traditional conservation mechan- 
isms. Frequent extraction has threatened the existence of 
several species. New on-farm activity in the form of 
commercial agriculture has already threatened the loss of 
crop biodiversity. Three traditional food crops have already 
disappeared from the area (Singh, 1998a; Singh and Ram, 
1996; Singh et al., 1996). Local collectors stated that species 
such as Morchella esculenta, Dioscorea deltoidea Dactylor- 
hiza hatagirea, A insliaea aptera, Juglans regia and Aconi- 
turn heterophyllurn, which were once locally available, are 
now very difficult to find. In fact Saussurea lappa is likely to 
disappear from the area. 
The important western Himalayan wild medicinal plants 
that have become endangered (Pushpangadan, 1996) in recent 
years as a result of overexploitation and unscientific collection 
include Aconiturn ferox, A. heterophyllurn, A. bayouni, Angel- 
ica glauca, Atropa acurninata, Colchicum luteurn, Delphinium 
denundahirn, Dioscorea deltoidea, Ephedra gerardiana, 
Heracleiirn canescens, hula recernosa, Orchis latifolia, Juni- 
penis communis, Paeonia ernodi, Picrorrhiza kurrooa, Podo- 
phyllurn hexandnirn, Polygonurn alpinurn, Polygonatum 
verticillaturn, P. grarninifoliurn, Nardostachys grandijlora, 
Physochlaina praealta, Rhododendron hypenanthurn, Skim- 
rnia laureola, Sorbw cuspidata, Swertia chirayita, Tanacetum 
longifolium, Typhoniurn diversifoliurn and conifers like Abies 
webbiana, Abies pindrow, etc. Of the above, 10 species are 
found in the study area (Table 5). The table also shows the 
botanical description and uses of some of the commercially 
exploited medicinal plants. 
NTFP conservation - 
sustainable development priorities 
Sustainable development and conservation are two sides 
of the same coin. The term conservation here refers to both 
protection and sustainable use of NTFP in the area. There- 
fore, sustainable development in this context does not refer 
only to mobilizing a variety of integrated action-oriented 
land-use production systems and emphasizing indigenous 
land-use based crop production systems by incorporating 
appropriate technical know-how for capitalizing resources 
and upgrading livelihood in the area. It should also be 
extended to involve local institutions in participatory devel- 
opment management approaches through functional grass- 
roots level institutional mechanisms and incorporation of 
appropriately designed technology for the better use and 
management of NTFP. Such an integrated holistic approach 
will serve to improve the economy of the rural people, 
satisfy human needs, provide equity and social justice, 
and maintain social, cultural and biological diversity as 
well as the ecological integrity of the system. Consideration 
of environmental and socio-economic aspects reveal that an 
alternative sustainable integrated management strategy is 
required for both land use and income generation. 
Government programmes usually focus on the manage- 
ment of timber producing trees for economic, commercial 
76 
G.S. Singh /Natural Resources Forum 23 (1999) 65-77 
and industrial benefits. However, NTFPs have so far 
not been adequately managed even for these aspects. 
Some sporadic efforts have been made in the past by 
the forest agency to control herb collection. Extraction 
of Dioscorea deltoidea and Taws bnccata is allowed 
by the state government on a three to four year rotation 
basis. However, most gatherers have never even heard 
of such a system and have been collecting and marketing 
the herb every year. Increasing the export fee of some 
of the medicinal plants would not only be financially 
beneficial to the government but would also help the local 
people. 
In principle, NTFPs can be harvested without damaging 
the forest ecosystem. The first step to achieving this is 
developing an intimacy between the forest ecosystem and 
the people who utilize its resources. Harvesting procedures, 
processing practices, storage techniques, increased value 
added and marketing channels need to be explored. Infor- 
mation related to various stages of the trade should be 
collected and made available to the villagers. Systems of 
regeneration, cultivation and domestication should be 
evolved. Wild medicinal plants like Saiissrirea lappa, 
Inula racemom and Carrim carvi were cultivated in Lahaul 
and Spiti districts in the early 1940s, making the state the 
largest grower of these important herbal drugs (Anonymous, 
1993; Singh et al., 1997a.b). As Sarissrirea lappn is found in 
and around the study area and is likely to become extinct, 
this plant should be cultivated in the area. Cultivation of 
medicinal plants has been recommended by several 
researchers (Zhou, 1993; Singh et al., 1997a,b). In one 
study, Rao and Saxena (1994) studied the viability of medic- 
inal plant cultivation with mixed cropping in the Central 
Himalayas. They had very positive results. Commercial 
scale plantations should be encouraged both within (in 
situ cultivation) and outside (ex situ cultivation) forested 
areas, as most of the medicinal plants and lichens are 
shade and moisture loving. NTFP plantations would be 
better suited to agroforestry systems on uncultivated private 
and government land and land that fulfils the basic objec- 
tives of genetic resource conservation, maintenance of 
biodiversity and improvement of the rural economy. Ex 
situ conservation should be linked with commercial cultiva- 
tion. Indigenous knowledge will have to be complemented 
with affordable appropriate scientific knowledge to improve 
the livelihoods of local people. Mere planning and use 
of NTFP would not be conducive to both habitat and 
genetic resource conservation. Crucial actions needed 
include: conserving natural ecosystems (in situ conserva- 
tion) as protected areas; and declaring biosphere reserves, 
national parks and sanctuaries using sacred groves as 
cultural relicts for managing and enhancing biodiversity 
(Khiewtam and Rarnakrishnan, 
1989; Rarnakrishnan, 
1992; Singh et al., 1996). An integrated training pro- 
gramme for sustainable use of NTFP should be organized 
in collaboration with local users, managers and policy 
managers. 
Summary and conclusions 
The dependence of local communities on the use of 
NTFPs cannot be ignored and must be an important consid- 
eration in the development of programmes and policies 
(Singh and Singh, 1989; Moench, 1989; Ramakrishnan, 
1992; Gadgil et al., 1993; Davis and Wali, 1994; Singh 
et al., 1996). Development of infrastructure in the form of 
roads and market facilities has led to rapid comrnercializa- 
tion in an area earlier characterized by inaccessibility, 
marginality, fragility, climatic variability, landscape diver- 
sity and precarious environmental conditions. These facil- 
ities have accelerated the flow of NTFP or medicinal plants 
to the urban-industrial sectors, causing severe damage to the 
traditional subsistence societies and degrading natural forest 
resources. Local people are not aware of the potential mone- 
tary benefits of the NTFPs. The margin of profits for local 
people could be raised through education about dynamic 
market demand, commercial values of products and scope 
for local value addition to the products. It seems imperative 
that local knowledge be complemented by scientific knowl- 
edge in the cultivation of economically important NTFP 
species. This study suggests that the cultivation of medicinal 
herbs in uncultivated lands and abandoned fields of the 
study areas will help in conservation of potential traditional 
knowledge and forest wealth. 
Broadly, three major threats to medicinal plants in parti- 
cular were observed. They are: loss of habitat because of 
factors such as land conversion; agricultural expansion; and 
loss of natural vegetation cover. The overexploitation of 
some of the commercially viable species caused by increas- 
ing commercial demand for herbal medicines in urban areas 
pose the next threat. Overall gradual loss of the traditional 
primary health care system and indigenous knowledge is the 
third most prominent threat. The implementation and enfor- 
cement of harvesting restrictions, regulations and restraints 
are essential if ecological security is to be attained. Socio- 
economic circumstances, increase in population pressure 
and uncontrolled market demand culminate to give rise to 
unrestricted, unrestrained and unregulated use of NTFP. The 
same factors have contributed to the scarcity and impending 
extinction of some medicinal plants. Commercialization of 
medicinal herbs has introduced middlemen and contractors 
into an activity that was previously managed purely by local 
people. Extraction of NTFPs before maturation has contrib- 
uted to poor regeneration in some species. Government poli- 
cies and programmes combined with local institutions could 
lead the way for better management and use of NTFPs and 
also improve the rural economy. Ex situ cultivation of over- 
extracted NTFP resources should be started soon in uncul- 
tivated farms and waste forest land. 
NTFPs play a significant role in supporting the local 
economy and traditional health care system in a large 
number of developing countries where a sizeable portion 
of the population depends on traditional medicine (Rao, 
1981; Gangwar and Ramakrishnan, 1990; Medley, 1993; 
G.S. Singh / iVatrrm1 Resources Fonrrn 23 (1999) 65-77 
77 
Cunningham, 199 I ;  Chhabra and Mahunnah, 1994; Mana- 
ndhar, 1995). Farnsworth et al. (1985) have also reported 
that about 80% of the people in developing countries 
continue to use traditional folk medicines obtained from 
the natural world. The preservation of forests in tropical 
regions is complicated by the high levels of dependence of 
local people on land and forest resources (Dasmann, 1976; 
Olindo, 1989), but for the same reason is also essential for 
their future. Their knowledge of traditional plant use and 
resource management processes contributes significantly 
towards asscssing the economic value of indigenous biotic 
resources and establishing effective strategies for conserva- 
tion (Balick and Mendelsohn, 1992; Nicholson and Arzeni, 
1993; Denslow and Padoch, 1988; Prance, 1989). Theirparti- 
cipation is crucial to the conservation and preservation of 
their forest areas and the survival of threatened forest species. 
Acknowledgements 
The author is indebted to the Director of the G.B. Pant 
Institute of Himalayan Environmentald Development, Kosi- 
Almora, for providing infrastructural facilities. Constructive 
comments and suggestions received from Dr. Gulab Singh on 
an earlier draft is gratefully acknowledged, as well as anon- 
ymous comments on the present article. Thanks are owed to 
Drs. A.K. Das, K.G. Saxena, K.S. Rao and S.C. Ram for their 
support and discussion. Last, but not least, the author is also 
thankful to the staff‘ of the Himachal Pradesh Forest Depart- 
ment, as well as the villagers of the study area, for their sincere 
cooperation and assistance in providing much useful informa- 
tion, without which this study would not have been possible. 
References 
Anderson. A.. 1886. Forest settlement of Kullu Sub Division of Kangra 
District. In: Civil and Militry Gazette. Lahore. 
Anonymous. 1993. Forest of Hirnachnl Pradesh. Department of Forests, 
Farming and conservation. Shimla, HP. 
Balick. M.J.. Mendelsohn. R.. 1992. Assessing the economic value of tradi- 
tional medicines from tropical rain forest. Conservation Biology 6. 
Chhabra, S.C., Mahunnah. R.L.A., 1994. Plants used in traditional medi- 
cine by Hayas of the Kagera region, Tanzania. Economic Botany 48, 
12 I - 129. 
Cunningham. A.B., 1991. Development of a conservation policy on 
commercially exploited medicinal plants: a case study from southern 
Africa. In: Akerele, 0. Heywood. V. Synge, H. (Eds.), The Conserva- 
tion of Medicinal Plants, Proceedings of an International Consultation, 
21-27 March, 1988, Chiang Mai. Thailand. Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge, pp. 337-358. 
Dasmann, R.F.. 1976. Life-styles and natureconservation. Oryx 13.28 1-286. 
Davis, S.H.. Wali. A,, 1994. Indigenous land tenure and tropical forest 
management in Latin America. Ambio 23, 485-490. 
Denslow, J., Padoch, C., (Eds.). 1988. People of the Tropical Rain Forest. 
University of California Press, Berkeley and Smithsonian Institution 
Traveling Exhibition Service. Washington, DC. 
Farnsworth, N.R. Akerele, 0, Bingel. A S ,  1985. Medicinal plants in ther- 
apy. Bulletin of World Health Organization 63, 965-981. 
Farooquee. N.A.. Saxena. K.G.. 1996. Conservation and utilization of 
128-130. 
medicinal plants in high hills of the central Himalayas. Environmental 
Conservation 23. 75-80. 
Gadgil, M.. Berkes, F., Folke, C., 1993. Indigenous knowledge for biotli- 
versity conservation. Ambio 22. 15 1-156. 
Ganywar. A.K.. Ramakrishnan, P.S., 19YO. Ethnobiological notes on some 
tribes of Arunachal Pradesh. north east India. Economic Botany 34.94- 
105. 
Gaston. A.J., Carson. P.J.. 1992. A reappraisal of the great Hinlalayan 
National Park, Himachal Wild Life Project 111. Himachal Pradesh 
Department of Forest Farming and Conservation, International Trust 
for Nature Conservation, World Wide Fund for Nature India, Oriental 
Bird Club. 
Joshi, A.R., Edington, J.M., 1990. The use of medicinal plants by two 
village communities in the central development region of Nepal. 
Economic Botany 44, 71-83. 
Khiewtarn. R.S.. Ramakrishnan. P.S.. 1989. Socio-cultural studies of the 
sacred groves at Cherrapunji and adjoining areas in north eastern India. 
Man In India 69, 64-71. 
Manandhar. N.P.. 1995. An inventory of some herbal drugs of Myagdi 
district, Nepal. Economic Botany 49. 371-379. 
Medley, K.E., 1993. Extractive forest resources of the Tana river, National 
Primate Reserve, Kenya. Economic Botany 47, 171- 183. 
Moench, M., 1989. Forest degradation and the structure of mass utilization 
in a Himalayan foothill village. Environmental Conservation 16, 137- 146. 
Nicholson, M.S., Arzeni, C.B., 1993. The market medicinal plants of 
Monterrey. Nuevo Leon, Mexico. Economic Botany 47, 184-192. 
Olindo, P.. 1989. Overview: a planner’s perspective. In: Western, D. Pearl. 
M.C. (Eds.), Conservation for the Twenty-First Century. Oxford 
University Press, Oxford. pp. 25 1-253. 
Pnnce, G.T.. 1989. Economic prospects from tropical rain forest ehnobotany. 
In: Browder. J.O. 
(Ed.), Fragile Lands of Latin America. Strategies for 
Sustainable Development, Westview Press. Boulder, CO. pp. 61 -74. 
Pushpangadan, P., 1996. Ethnobiology in India. A st:Itus report all India 
coordinated research project on ethnobiology. Ministry of Environment 
and Forests, Govt. of India. New Delhi. 
Ramakrishnan. P.S.. 1992. Shifting Agriculture and Sustainable Develop- 
ment: An Interdisciplinary Study from North Eastern India. Man and 
Biosphere Series vol. 10. Pmis. UNESCO :ind Carnforth (UK). Panhenon. 
Rao, K.S.. Saxena, K.G.. 1994. Sustainable Development of Rehabilitation 
of Degraded Village Lands in Himalaya. In: Bishen Singh Muhendra 
Pal Singh, (Ed.), Dehradun. 
Rao. K.S., Saxena. K.G.. 1996. Minor forest products’ management: 
problems and prospects in remote high altitude villages of central 
Himalaya. Int. J. Sustain. Dev. World Ecol. 3, 60-70. 
Rao. R.R., 1981. Ethnobotany of Meghalaya: Medicinal plants used by 
Khasi and Garo tribes. Economic Botany 35, 4-9. 
Singh, G.S., 1998. Environmental, ecological and socio-economic impact 
of introduced crops in western Himalaya: A case study of Kully valley. 
Journal of Human Ecology 9,63-72. 
Singh, G.S., 1998b. Ethnobotanical study of useful plants of the Kullu 
District in north western Himalaya India. J. Econ. Tax. Bot. (in press). 
Singh, G.S., Ram, S.C., 1996. Traditional agricultural practices: A chan- 
ging scenario in Kullu valley, north western Himalaya. Environmental 
Awareness 19, 139-143. 
Singh, G.S., Ram. S.C.. Kuniyal, J.C.. 1997a. Changing traditional land use 
patterns in the Great Himalaya: A case study of Lahaul valley. J. Envir- 
onmental Systems 25, 195-21 1. 
Singh, G.S., Rao, K.S., Saxena, K.G., 1997b. Energy and economic effi- 
ciency of the mountain farming system: A case study in the north 
western Himalaya. Journal of Sustainable Agriculture 9. 25-49. 
Singh, G.S., Saxena, K.G.. Rao. K.S.. Ram, S.C., 1996. Traditional knowl- 
edge and threat of its extinction in Chhakinal watershed in north 
western Himalaya. Man in India 76, 1-17. 
Singh, V.P., Singh, J.S., 1989. Man and forests: a case study from the dry 
tropics of India. Environmental Conservation 16. 129- 136. 
Zhou. S., 1993. Cultivation of Ammomum villosum in tropical forests. 
Forest Ecology and Management 60, 157-162. 
