Int. J. Pharmacogn., 32 (1994), No. 1, pp. 51-58 
0925-161 8/94/3201 -005 1$6.00 
0 Swets & Zeitlinger 
Traditional Phytotherapy of Some Medicinal Plants 
Used by the Tharus of the Nainital District, Uttar 
Pradesh, India 
K.K. SINGH and J.K. MAHESHWARI 
Ethnobotany Discipline, National Botanical Research Institute, Lucknow, India 
ABSTRACT 
The Tharu tribe inhabits the Himalayan foothills from Nainital in the West to Darjeeling in the East, 
and utilize plants in the treatment of diseases and other disorders. The present study deals with the 
therapeutic uses of 63 plants used by the Tharus of the Nainital district, U.P., in health care. Local 
names, preparation of ethnomedicine, dosage and mode of administration have been provided by 
selected informants and experienced medicine men. The study has provided some interesting data 
concerning medicinal plants which may enable phytochemists and pharmacologists to determine 
their true therapeutic properties. 
INTRODUCTION 
The SubHimalayan terai region of Uttar Pradesh is inhabited by two tribes, the 
Tharu and the Bhoxa. The Tharus are found in the Lakhimpur-Kheri, Nainital, 
Gonda, Bahraich and Gorakhpur districts of Uttar Pradesh. They have been 
struggling to survive for centuries, and have led a secluded life in forests areas. 
The Tharus are divided into a number of endogamous sects. The Rana Tharus 
of the Nainital district, U.P., are found in Khatima and Sitarganj Blocks, and 
claim to be descendants of the Ranas of Chittor. Their total population is ap- 
proximately 40,000 in the district. Oldham (quoted in Crooke, 1896) believes 
that the Tharus are Indian aborigines that are very different from the Tartat 
Highland races. Due to a close and long association with the forest, they have 
learnt to utilize many plant species for their day-to-day needs. The thick forest 
belt and the study area of the district are situated in the terai region of the 
foothills of the Himalayas in close proximity to Nepal. The Tharus live by hunt- 
ing and fishing, and gather forest produce, medicinal herbs, fruits and vegetables 
from the surrounding flora. They practise primitive agriculture and grow rice, 
sugarcane, maize, wheat, barley, lentil, gram, peas, mustard, vegetables, tobacco, 
and bananas. 
The age old practice of traditional phytotherapy in the treatment of diseases is 
Pharmaceutical Biology Downloaded from informahealthcare.com by Flinders University of South Australia on 01/09/15
For personal use only.
52 
K.K. SINGH AND J.K. MAHESHWARI 
still prevalent amongst the Tharus of the district. Earlier, many researchers have 
gathered information on the uses of medicinal plants by the tribes (Maheshwari 
et al., 1981, 1986; Singh and Maheshwari, 1983; Singh and Singh, 1985; Jain, 
1965, 1975; Jain and Tarafdar, 1970; Jain et al., 1973) and have brought to light 
the new or less known uses of many medicinal plants used by the tribes in the 
country. The present study provides therapeutical applications of 63 medicinal 
plants among the Tharus which have not been mentioned in earlier literature. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
During the course of this study, 40 Tharu villages adjacent to forest areas were surveyed and studied. 
The data on therapeutic uses of plants, herbal processing, preparations, dosage and mode of adminis- 
tration were recorded. These were confirmed from tribal chiefs, medicine men, Baiga, Ojhas and 
other experienced and knowledgable tribal informants in the forests. The data obtained from different 
villages and localities were compared, analysed, and are presented in this paper. The voucher speci- 
mens and the crude samples of medicinal plants are preserved in the Ethnobotanical Herbarium-cum- 
Museum of the institute. The plants are arranged alphabetically under different diseases and disor- 
ders, giving information on local names of the plants, uses and field numbers (EBH). The Tharus 
treat their diseases and disorders with a single plant or with combinations of different plants. They 
prepare paste, pills, powders, decoctions, aqueous extracts, juice, etc., from plant parts and use these 
preparations directly for common diseases and disorders such as diarrhoea, dysentery, jaundice, 
cough, cold, headache, fever, piles, skin and ophthalmic diseases, bone fractures, boils, blisters, 
rheumatism, gout, and antifertility. 
RESULTS 
Herbal drugs 
A. Malaria 
1. Caesalpinia bonduc L. Roxb. emend. Dandy ex Excell. (Caesalpiniaceae) 
L.n.: Kanja 
The young leaves along with the leaves of Neem (Azadirachra indica Juss) are roasted and made 
into powder and given three times a day for three days to cure malarial fever (EBH 4968). 
L.n.: Panwar. 
A decoction of the seeds is given three times a day for three days to cure malarial fever and cough 
(EBH 5920). 
L.n.: Moth 
The whole plant along with young leaves of Neem (Azadirachra indica) Juss., black pepper and 
leaves of Tulsi (Ocimum sanctum L.) is made into a decoction. The vapour is used to cure ma- 
larial fever; decoction is given three times a day for three days for the same purpose (EBH 5923). 
2. Cassia tora L. (Caesalpiniaceae) 
3. Cyperus rorundus L. (Cyperaceae) 
B. Febrigue 
1. Cissampelos pareira L. (Menispermaceae) 
Ln.: Madrachi. 
The aqueous extract of the root is given three times a day for three days in fever (EBH 4972). 
Pharmaceutical Biology Downloaded from informahealthcare.com by Flinders University of South Australia on 01/09/15
For personal use only.
MEDICINAL PLANTS OF THE THARUS 
53 
2. Luffa graveolens Roxb. (Cucurbitaceae) 
L.n.: Ghosrain. 
The leaf powder, with black salt, is given three times a day for two days to cure fever (EBH 4969). 
L.n.: Gurech. 
The leaf juice, with black pepper, is given in fever (EBH 4912). 
4. Vernonia anthelmintica (L.) Willd. (Asteraceae) 
Ln.: Kalajiri. 
The leaf paste, with black pepper, is made into pills. Three pills a day are given for two days to 
cure fever. The seed powder is also given in fever (EBH 4955). 
L.n.: Meudi. 
The leaf juice is given three times a day for three days to cure fever (EBH 4905). 
3. Tinospora cordifolia Miers (Menispermaceae) 
5 .  Virex negundo L. (Verbenaceae) 
C. Bone fracture 
1. Equisetum debile Roxb. (Equisetaceae) 
L.n.: Jor Katora. 
The paste of the plant with Hardi (Curcuma longa L.), salt and calcium is applied to fractures. 
The aqueous extract of the plant is taken internally for 15 days for treating bone fracture (EBH 
4995). 
Peristrophe bicalyculata (Retz.) Nees (Acanthaceae) 
L.n.: Patrang. 
The paste of the plant is applied to bone fracture, for 15 days, daily (EBH 4939). 
Vanda tessellata (Roxb.) Hook. ex G. Don (Orchidaceae) 
L.n.: Harjodi. 
The paste of the whole plant is applied with salt on the fractured portion. The aqueous extract is 
also given internally for the same purpose (EBH 4919). 
2. 
3. 
D. Rheumatism, gouthflammation 
1. Aloea Vera (L.)Burm. f. Syn. A. barbadensis Mill. (Liliaceae) 
The pulp of the plant, with salt and fermented sugarcane juice, is mixed together and taken to 
treat pain and inflammation of the body (EBH 4923). 
L.n.: Malkakani. 
The paste of the fruit mixed with warmed mustard oil is applied externally in rheumatism and 
gout. The seed oil is massaged in body pain and rheumatism (EBH 4909). 
L.n.: Saragbaburi, Akashbel. 
The warm paste of the plant is applied in rheumatism and gout to affected parts of the body (EBH 
4920). 
L.n.: Shisham. 
The seed oil and decoction of the wood is used in the treatment of rheumatic pain. The oil is also 
used in skin diseases. The aqueous extract of the leaves is given in sun stroke and the paste of the 
leaves is applied on the forehead for sunstroke (EBH 4937). 
Ipomea carnea Jacq. subsp. fistulosa Austin (Convolvulaceae) 
Ln.: Behaya, Besharam. 
The warm leaves in mustard oil are applied as bandages in rheumatism and gout for one month 
(EBH 5910). 
L.n.: Bijasar. 
The powdered gum, powdered alum and hot milk, is given for rheumatic pain. The powdered 
stem bark is given orally in inflammation of the body for ten days (EBH 4917). 
2. 
Celastrus paniculatus Willd. (Celastraceae) 
3. 
Cuscuta reflexa Roxb. (Cuscutaceae) 
4. Dalbergia sissoo Roxb. (Fabaceae) 
5. 
6. Pterocarpus marsupium Roxb. (Fabaceae) 
Pharmaceutical Biology Downloaded from informahealthcare.com by Flinders University of South Australia on 01/09/15
For personal use only.
54 
K.K. SINGH AND J.K. MAHESHWARI 
E. Jaundice 
L.n,: Piaj. 
The juice of the leaves is put into the eyes for treating jaundice. 
L.n,: Saragbaburi. 
The plant is tied on the neck of the patient, and is also spread on the bed, to cure jaundice. The 
water vapour of this plant is inhaled for treating jaundice, and tetanus (EBH 4920). 
L.n.: Aam. 
The decoction of the stem bark is given in jaundice for six days. Its vapour is also inhaled (EBH 
4928). 
L.n.: Koorasan. 
The aqueous extract of the bark is given three times a day for seven days in the treatment of 
jaundice. The leaves spread on the bed of the patient are said to give quick relief in curing 
jaundice (EBH 4927). 
1. Allium cepa L. (Liliaceae) 
2. Cuscuta reflexa Roxb. (Cuscutaceae) 
3. Mungifera indica L. (Anacardiaceae) 
4. Terminalia arjuna W. & A. (Combretaceae) 
F. Boils and blisters 
1. Achyranthes aspera L. (Amaranthaceae) 
L.n.: Chirchira, Latjeera. 
The paste of the leaves is applied on cuts, boils and blisters (EBH 4983). 
2. Amorphophallus paeonifolius Nicolson syn. A. campanulatus (Roxb.) BI. ex Decne. (Araceae) 
L.n.: Jimikand. 
The warm paste of the corm is applied on boils, to induce suppuration and healing (EBH 5000). 
L.n.: Poy 
The warm paste of the leaves is applied on boils and blisters (EBH 4930). 
L.n.: Goragantha. 
The paste of the flowers is applied on cuts and boils (EBH 4936). 
L.n.: Cana 
The paste of the root is applied for suppuration of boils. 
L.n.: Bhang. 
The leaf paste is applied on cuts, boils and blisters for four days (EBH 4941). 
7 .  Euphorbia nivulia Buch. - Ham. (Euphorbiaceae) 
L.n.: Sehund. 
The latex of the plant is applied to induce suppuration of boils and blisters (EBH 4990). 
Ipomea carnea Jacq subsp. fistulosa Austin (Convolvulaceae) 
L.n.: Besharam. 
The warm paste of the leaves is applied on cuts and boils for three days (EBH 5910). 
L.n.: Bakain. 
The paste of the leaves is applied to induce suppuration and healing of boils (EBH 4932). 
L.n.: Nagphani. 
The paste of the phylloclade (stem) mixed with powder of haldi (Curcuma longa L.) salt and 
butter is made into an ointment which is applied on boils and blisters to induce suppuration and 
healing (EBH 4944). 
L.n.: Bariara. 
3. Basella alba L. (Basellaceae) 
4. Caesulia axillaris Roxb. (Asteraceae) 
5 .  Canna indica L. (Cannaceae) 
6. Cannabis sativn L. (Cannabiaceae) 
8. 
9. Melia azaderach L. (Meliaceae) 
10. Opuntia dillenii (Ker. -Gawl) Haw. (Cactaceae) 
1 1, Sida rhombifolia L. (Malvaceae) 
Pharmaceutical Biology Downloaded from informahealthcare.com by Flinders University of South Australia on 01/09/15
For personal use only.
MEDICINAL PLANTS OF THE THARUS 
55 
The leaf paste is applied on cuts and to induce suppuration of boils (EBH 5913). 
L.n.: Kacharia. 
The pulp of the fruits is applied for suppuration and healing of boils and blisters (EBH 4958). 
L.n.: Mainphal. 
The paste of the root is applied on boils for four days. The fruits are also used for stupefying fish 
and as detergent (EBH 4950). 
12. Solanum viarum Dunal syn. S. khasianum Clarke (Solanaceae) 
13. Xeromphis spinosa (Thunb.) Keay (Rubiaceae) 
G. Diarrohea, dysentery aqd other stomach disorders 
I .  Gaesalpinia bonduc (L.) Roxb. (Caesalpiniaceae) 
L.n.: Kanja. 
The seed paste is given for stomach pain, for one day (EBH 4968). 
L.n.: Biada. 
The powdered rhizome mixed, with jaggery, is given for stomach pain (EBH 591 1). 
L.n.: Katila. 
The powdered root is given three times a day for three days to cure colic (EBH 4947) 
L.n.: Gular. 
The latex of the plant is used, with sugar, in dysentery. The unripe fruit powder is given in 
diarrhoea, for three days (EBH 4978). 
L.n.: Mehandi. 
The leaf juice along with black pepper and liquid curd cures dysentery within two days (EBH 
4957). 
L a :  Bhambhiri, goja. 
The powdered root mixed with powdered root of Neebu (Citrus sp.) and salt is given for stomach 
pain (EBH 4945). 
L.n.: Khagasa. 
The aqueous extract of the rootstock with black pepper is given three times a day for three days 
to cure stomach disorders (EBH 4943). 
Oroxylum indicum (L.) Vent. (Bignoniaceae) 
L.n.: Sona. 
The stem bark juice is given for indigestion three times for one day (EBH 4904). 
Polygonurn barbaturn (L.) subsp. gracile Dans. (Polygonaceae) 
L.n.: Miria. 
The juice is given three times for one day for stomach pain (EBH 4994). 
L.n.: Jamun 
The paste of the bark and curd given three times a day is said to cure dysentery in two days (EBH 
4951). 
L.n.: Gureich. 
The aqueous extract of the plant is given for stomach disorders and indigestion, two times a day 
for two days (EBH 4912). 
2. Curcurna amada Roxb. (Zingiberaceae) 
3. Echinops echinatus Roxb. (Asteraceae) 
4. Ficus racemosa L. (Moraceae) 
5. Lawsonia inermis L. (Lythraceae) 
6. Millettin extensa Baker (Caesalpiniaceae) 
7. Momordica dioica Roxb. (Cucurbitaceae) 
8. 
9. 
10. Syzygium cumini L. Skeels (Myrtaceae) 
1 1. Tinospora cordifolia Miers (Menispermaceae) 
H. Antifertility 
1. Milleftia extensa Baker (Caesalpiniaceae) 
L.n.: Bhambhiri. 
Pharmaceutical Biology Downloaded from informahealthcare.com by Flinders University of South Australia on 01/09/15
For personal use only.
56 
K.K. SINGH AND J.K. MAHESHWARI 
2. 
3. 
I. 
1. 
2. 
J. 
1. 
2. 
3 
4. 
5 
6. 
The aqueous extract of the root bark, with black pepper, is given after menstrual period, daily for 
five days to prevent conception (EBH 4945). 
Momordica dioica Roxb. (Cucurbitaceae) 
L.n.: Khegsa. 
The aqueous extract of rootstock of the male plant, with powdered root of ‘Kanja’ (Caesalpinia 
borlduc L. Roxb.) given two times a day for two days after menstrual period to check conception 
in women (EBH 4943). 
Polygonum barbarurn L. subsp. gracile Dans. (Polygonaceae) 
L.n.: Miria. 
The aqueous extract of the root with the root of ’Mehandi’ (Lawsonia inermis L.) given three times 
in one day after menstrual period to prevent conception (EBH 4994). 
Abortifacients 
Amorphophallus paeonifolius (Denn.) Nicolson syn. A. campanulatus (Roxb.) BI. ex Decne. 
(Araceae) 
L.n.: Jimikand. 
The decoction of the corm mixed with the powdered seeds of gajar (Daucas carom L.) and old 
jaggery given two times a day for seven days, to cause abortion of one to three months pregnancy 
(EBH 5000). 
Cirrus medica L. (Rutaceae) 
L.n.: Biura. 
The aqueous extract of the root, with black pepper, is given to induce abortion (EBH 4935). 
Eye diseases 
Achyranthes aspera L. (Amaranthaceae) 
L.n.: Chirchiri. 
The root paste is applied in the eyes to remove cataracts (EBH 4983, 5903). 
Calotropis giganrea (L.) Ait. (Asclepiadaceae) 
L.n.: Akahua. 
The ash of the leaves mixed with wax is dropped in eyes to remove redness (EBH 5916). 
Capsicum annum L. (Solanaceae) 
L.n. : Mircha. 
The leaf juice is applied in eye diseases for three days (EBH 4977). 
Cissampelos pareira L. (Menispermaceae) 
L.n.: Madraichi. 
The leaf juice is applied to remove redness of the eyes, twice a day for three days (EBH 4972). 
Luffa graveolens Roxb. (Cucurbitaceae) 
L.n.: Ghosran. 
The paste of the fruit is applied in eye diseases (EBH 4969). 
Terminalia chebula Retz. (Combretaceae) 
L.n.: Had. 
The fruit paste mixed with powder of ‘Haldi’ (Cucurma longa L.) is applied for inflammation of 
the eyes (EBH 4979). 
K. Spermatorrhoea 
1. Achyranfhes aspera L. (Amaranthaceae) 
L.n.: Chirchira. 
The root paste mixed with black pepper is given for 15 days (EBH 4983,5903). 
L.n.: Bhant. 
The paste of the root, mixed with curd, is given (EBH 4962). 
3. Dendrophthoe falcara (L.f.) Ettingh. (Loranthaceae) 
L.n.: Banda. 
2. Clerodendrum viscosum Vent. (Verbenaceae) 
Pharmaceutical Biology Downloaded from informahealthcare.com by Flinders University of South Australia on 01/09/15
For personal use only.
MEDICINAL PLANTS OF THE THARUS 
57 
The powdered leaves are given (EBH 5912). 
Ln.: Bargad. 
The latex is used; the aerial root along with flowers of gurhal (Hibiscus rosa-sinensis L.) is given 
(EBH 5909). 
L.n.: Gursakri. 
The root paste, with sugar, is given for 15 days (EBH 5906). 
Sida cordata (Burm. f.) Borss. syn. S. veronicifolia Lamk. (Malvaceae) 
Ln.: Sahdevi. 
The aqueous extract of the whole plant is given twice a day for seven days. (EBH 4940). 
L.n.: Kateri. 
The aqueous extract of the whole plant is given in spermatorrhoea and general weakness (EBH 
5915). 
4. Ficus bengalensis L. (Moraceae) 
5. Grewia hirsuta Vahl (Tiliaceae) 
6. 
7 .  Tridax procumbens L. (Asteraceae) 
L. Diabetes 
1. Ficus bengalensis L. (Moraceae) 
Ln.: Bargad. 
The aerial root paste is mixed with salt, and after filtering, is given as a diuretic and also in 
diabetes once a day in the morning for eight days (EBH 5909). 
M. Piles (Hemerrhoids) 
1. 
Chenopodiurn ambrosioides L. (Chenopodiaceae) 
L.n.: Kirmari. 
The leaf paste is applied to hemerrhoids for twenty days. The juice is also given internally (EBH 
4980,5902). 
Ln.: Harsingar. 
The seed paste is applied to hemerrhoids (EBH 5908). 
5. Nyctanthes arbor-trisris L. (Oleaceae) 
N. Skin diseases 
1. Kigelia pinnata DC. (Bignoniaceae) 
Ln.: Balamkhira. 
The fruit paste is applied in eczema (EBH 5905). 
Lablab purpureus (L.) Sweet. (Fabaceae) 
Ln.: Sem. 
The paste of the leaves is applied on skin diseases (EBH 5918). 
2. 
0. Snake bite 
1. Achyranthes aspera L. (Amaranthaceae) 
Ln.: Chirchiri. 
The root extract is given as an antidote (EBH 4983). 
Ln. : Biskhapara. 
The leaf juice, with black pepper, is given (EBH 5922) 
2. Boerhavia diffusa L. (Nyctaginaceae) 
P. Cough, cold and headache 
1. Eucalyptus tereticornis Sm. (Myrtaceae) 
L.n.: Liptus. 
The paste of the leaves is applied on the forehead for headache. The leaf decoction is to treat 
cough and cold (EBH 5924). 
2. Musa paradisiaca L. (Musaceae) 
Pharmaceutical Biology Downloaded from informahealthcare.com by Flinders University of South Australia on 01/09/15
For personal use only.
58 
K.K. SINGH AND J.K. MAHESHWARI 
L.n.: Kela. 
The ash of the leaves, mixed with honey, is given to treat cough (EBH 5928). 
L.n.: Peeper. 
The ripe fruit powder, mixed with honey, is given for cough and cold. The powdered root sniffed 
for headache (EBH 4933). 
3. Piper longurn L. (Piperaceae) 
DISCUSSION 
This ethnobotanical survey and field study among the Tharu tribe highlighted the 
practise of traditional phytotherapy for the treatment of various diseases and 
disorders, has brought to light new information concerning medicinal plants that 
may be useful for phytochemists and pharmacologists. Future investigations will 
be required to establish therapeutic properties for safe use, and clinical trials may 
eventually be considered. Further, there is the potential need of establishing 
herbal drug farms for the production and processing of herbal drugs, and this 
may improve the economy of the tribes. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The authors thank Dr. P.V. Sane, Director, National Botanical Research Institute, Lucknow for 
providing facilities for carrying out this investigation, to Development Officers of Khatima and 
Sitarganj Blocks of Nainital district, U.P. for help rendered during field work. 
REFERENCES 
CROOK, W. (1898). The Tribes and Caste of North Western Provinces and Oudh. Calcutta, Re- 
JAIN, S.K. (1965). Medicinal plant lore of the tribals of Bastar. Econ. Bof. 19: 236-250. 
JAIN, S.K. (1975). Medicinal plants. National Book Trust, New Delhi, 1-175. 
JAIN, S.K., BANERJEE, D.K. and PAL, D.C. (1973). Medicinal plants among certain Adivasis in 
India. Bull. Bof. Surv. India 15: 1-2. 
JAIN, S.K. and TARAFDAR, C.R. (1970). Medicinal plant lore of the Santals - A revival of P.O. 
Bodding’s Work. Econ. Bot. 24: 241-278. 
MAHESHWARI, J.K., SINGH, K.K. and SAHA, S. (1981). The Ethnobotany of the Tharus of Kheri 
district, Uttar Pradesh. Economic Botany Information Service, National Botanical Research 
Institute, Lucknow. pp. 1-49. 
MAHESHWARI, J.K., SINGH, K.K. and SAHA, S. (1986). Ethnobotany of Tribuls of Mirzupur 
District, Uffar Pradesh. Economic Botany Information Service. National Botanical Re- 
search Institute, Lucknow. pp. 1-38. 
SINGH, K.K. and MAHESHWARI, J.K. (1983). Traditional phytotherapy amongst the tribals of 
Varanasi district, U.P. J. Econ. Tan. Bot. 4: 829-838. 
SINGH, K.K. and SINGH, S.C. (1985). Some Medicinal Plants in the Folk-lore of Varanasi district, 
U.P. Bull. Medico-ethnobofanical Res. 6: 28-34. 
printed edition, title “The Tribes and Castes of North Western India” Vol. IV. 
Accepted June 30, 1992 
Pharmaceutical Biology Downloaded from informahealthcare.com by Flinders University of South Australia on 01/09/15
For personal use only.
